hey everyone Laszlo Montgomery once
again bringing you another episode taken
from the olden days of China
well not that old and 19th century in
the first half of the program we're
going to finish up the final days in
China for Robert fortune in this is an
inaugural trip we were treated over the
last four episodes to the descriptions
of his travels in Guangdong Fujin George
Jung and Jung soo from 1843 to 1846 in
this final installment from his first
book three years wanderings in the
northern provinces of China we're
treated to fortune swashbuckling
exploits fighting pirates off the coast
of Fujian province your guess is as good
as mine as far as how much of what he
describes is true but it's somewhat
exciting if highly unbelievable these
pirates were the scourge of the East
China Sea
nanni seafaring vessel sailing along the
coast from Jiujiang to Guangzhou lived
with this threat I featured the pirate
queen chun-li saw in a China history
podcast episode the south china sea
pirates were no pirates of the carribean
or even Penzance anyway this story told
by fortune offers a nice little vignette
of a well-worn theme of Westerner goes
to China saves the day rides off into
the sunset it all opens up in the
capital of Fujian province foo Joe as
for the main river of the province the
mean empties out into the East China Sea
in this episode fortune is attempting to
get passage from foo Joe - Joe Shawn off
the coast of Ningbo his ultimate
destination is Shanghai where he
intended to catch a vessel sailing to
Hong Kong and then on to London from
June of 1843 to May of 1846 Robert
fortune wandered all over the region's
adjacent to the newly opened treaty
ports the Horticultural Society of
London who sent him there was going to
be the recipient of all kinds of sea
NEADS plants specimens and various other
new natural discoveries that Robert
fortune picked up along the way
it was a success beyond everyone's
wildest imaginations and for fortune too
as I mentioned before he showed up on
the radar of the largest corporation in
the world who had this dangerous and
dubiously legal scheme to obtain through
nefarious means all the
thousand-year-old secrets contained
within the most renowned tea producing
regions in China this book that we've
all enjoyed together these past several
episodes was written right after he got
back to England and it was published a
year later in 1847 so anyways this
episode is a little more entertaining
than the others
it certainly has more drama and
excitement I hope you enjoy it at the
time on a visited Food Joe although it
was open to the British as a place of
trade and had a British console it was
little known in a mercantil point of
view the entrance to the river mien was
described as extremely difficult and
dangerous consequently few foreign
vessels ventured to touch at this port
when they're for my botanical researches
were completed and I was ready to return
north to Shanghai I was obliged to apply
for a passage in a Chinese junk a whole
fleet of which were to sail in a few
days for Ningbo and job who knowing the
dislike and jealousy which most of the
natives manifest towards foreigners and
some doubt whether I should be able to
induce them to take me as a passenger
and in that event I had determined to go
down to the mouth of the river and sand
ceremony get on board whether they
consented or not and was therefore
agreeably surprised when on sending my
servant to make enquiries as to the time
when they were likely to sail he
returned bringing with him the captain
and some of the sailors who were all not
only willing but most anxious that I
should go with them the principal part
of the cargo carried by the Ning bought
jabu junks is wood this is stowed on
deck and also lashed firmly to the
gunnels and sides with large ropes of
bamboo which are of great strength
several hundreds of these vessels may be
seen loading a
port of futo particularly in the summer
season when the monsoon is fair for
their voyage home the mandarins are
extremely jealous of so large a fleet
and will not allow them to carry guns
even for their own defense evidently
fearing that some day or other these
might be turned against the government
the consequence of this regulation is
that these poor sailors and all they
possess on board often fall an easy prey
to the Pirates who abound all along this
coast when the cargo was completed the
captain of the Jang came to inform you
that he was ready to start and requested
me to come on board whilst I was packing
up my luggage he began to examine my
firearms very minutely and said to me I
hope your gun is a good one and that you
have plenty of powder and shot what is
your reason for putting this question
said I I'm sure we shall have nothing to
shoot in our voyage up the coast oh yes
you will answered he we are very likely
to be attached by the john doe's who
swarm outside amongst the islands who
were the john doe said hi to my servant
never having heard the name before
oh they're pirates said he and we are
all very much frightened at them
nonsense I exclaimed no pirates will
attack us and if they do they will
repent it at this time I had no idea
that the coast was so infested with
these lawless characters and I put it
all down to the cowardice of my
informants as soon as I got on board we
Hove up the anchor and dropped down to
the mouth of the mean we here found a
large fleet of junks about 170 sail all
like ourselves loaded with wood and
ready to start for the northern parts of
Ningbo and jabu that evening a meeting
of the captains was held on board our
vessel and a deputation appointed to
wait upon the mandarins to request them
to send a convoy of war junks to protect
the fleet from the Pirates
these negotiations were carried on for
several days but the demands of the
mandarins are so exorbitant that the
junk people would not comply with them
and it was at last determined to sail
without the convoy just as they came to
this decision the wind changed and blew
a gale from the north for three days
when it veered round to the south and
blew nearly as strong from that quarter
and for the same space of time these
vessels never go to sea in stormy wet
even if the wind is fair and what with
gales of wind and negotiations with
mandarins that was obliged to content
myself with a junk life for a fortnight
at the mouth of the river as long as I
enjoyed health I got on well enough but
the exposure during the past summer
particularly at Foucault had gradually
undermined my constitution and the fever
which was probably kept off for a
certain time by bodily exertion now
seized me and compelled me to take to my
cot where I lay for a number of days
insensible at intervals at times when
consciousness returned I certainly
thought that my travels were drawing to
a close and that my grave would be a
lonely one on the banks of the mean it
seemed hard for me to die in a land of
strangers without a friend or countrymen
to close my eyes or follow me to my last
resting place and home friends and
country how doubly dear did they seem to
me then the win haven't been fear for
several days and the weather appearing
settled the captain of the junk came
down to the place where I lay and told
me they intended to sail on the
following morning he again inquired if I
had my gun and pistols and proper order
and plenty of powder and ball still
imagining that they were exaggerating
the dangers of the voyage I laughed and
said do not be afraid I have everything
in order and I will undertake to beat
off any pirates who may attack us
nevertheless I clearly saw that both
captain and sailors were really uneasy
about the voyage and would have been
very glad of another gale to afford a
pretext for deferring it a little longer
they had however no further excuse for
delay and it was settled that the whole
fleet should sail early the next day the
Chinese sailor never goes to sea without
first presenting and offering to the
gods to propitiate them in order that
the voyage may be a speedy and
successful one accordingly on this day
the cabin of our junk was set in order
and the tables covered with dishes of
pork mutton fruits and vegetables
candles and incense were burned upon the
tables for a short time and the whole
business had something solemn in
imposing about it the cook who seemed to
be the high priest conducted all the
ceremonies on other days as well as this
it was part of his duty to light the
candles in the little temple where the
gods were kept as well as to burn
and prostrate himself before them early
on the following morning the whole fleet
was in motion starting all together for
the sake of mutual protection the wind
and tide were both fair and we proceeded
along the coast with great rapidity and
were soon out of sight of the mean and
it's beautiful and romantic scenery the
plan of mutual protection soon seemed to
be abandoned and the vessels separated
into threes and fours each getting on as
well and as fast as it could about four
o'clock in the afternoon and when we
were some fifty or sixty miles from the
mean the captain and pilot came
hurriedly down to my cabin and for me
they saw a number of John dudes right
ahead lying in wait for us I ridiculed
the idea and told them they'd Majan
every junk they saw to be a pirate but
they still maintained that they were so
and I therefore considered it prudent to
be prepared for the worst I got out of
bed ill and feverish as I was and
carefully examined my firearms clearing
the nipples of my gun and pistols and
putting on fresh caps I also rammed down
a ball upon the top of each charge of
shot and my gun put a pistol in each
side pocket and patiently waited for the
result by the aid of a small pocket
telescope I could see is the nearest
junk approached that her deck was
crowded with man I then had no longer
any doubts regarding her intentions the
pilots an intelligent old man now came
up to me and said that he thought
resistance was of no use I might manage
to beat off one chunk or even two but
that I had no chance with five of them
being at that time and no mood to take
advice or be dictated to by any one I
ordered him off to look after his own
duty I knew perfectly well that if we
were taken by the Pirates I had not the
slightest chance of escape for the first
thing they would do would be to knock me
on the head and throw me overboard as
they would deem it dangerous to
themselves were right to get away at the
same time I must confess I had little
hopes of being able to beat off such a
number and devoutly wished myself
anywhere rather than where I was the
scene around me was a strange one the
captain pilot and one or two native
passengers were taking up the boards of
the cabin floor and putting their money
and other valuables out
site amongst the ballast the common
sailors to had their copper cache or
chin to hide and the whole place was in
a state of bustle and confusion when all
their more valuable property was hidden
that began to make some preparations for
defense baskets of small stones were
brought up from the hold and emptied out
on the most convenient parts of the deck
and were intended to be used as firearms
when the Pirates came to close quarters
this is a common mode of defense in
various parts of China and is effectual
enough when the enemy has only similar
weapons to bring against them but on the
coast of Fujian where we were now all
the pirate junks carried guns in
consequently a whole deck load of stones
could be a very little use against them
during the general bustle I missed my
own servant for a short time when he
returned to me he had made such a change
in his appearance that I did not
recognize him he was literally clothed
in rags which he had borrowed from the
sailors all of whom had also put on
their very worst clothes when I asked
him the reason of this change in his
outward man he told me that the Pirates
only made those persons prisoners who
had money and were likely to pay
handsomely for their ransom and that
they would not think it worth their
while to lay hold of a man in rags I was
surrounded by several of the crew who
might as well be called jobs comforters
some suggesting one thing and some
another and many proposed that we should
bring the junk round and run back to the
mean the nearest pirate was now within
200 or 300 yards of us and putting her
helm down gave us a broadside from her
guns all was now dismay and
consternation on board our junk and
every man ran below except two who are
at the helm I expected every moment that
these also would leave their post and
then we should have been an easy prey to
the Pirates my gun is nearer you than
those of the chandos said I to the two
men and if you move from the helm depend
on it I will shoot you the poor fellows
looked very uncomfortable but I suppose
thought they had better stand the fire
of the Pirates than mine and kept it
there post large boards heaps of old
clothes mats and things of that sort
which were at hand were thrown up to
protect us from the shot and as we had
every stitch of sail set
and a fair wind we were going through
the water at the rate of seven or eight
miles an hour the shot from the Pirates
felt considerably short of us and I was
therefore unable to form an opinion of
the range and power of their guns which
was of some use to me assistance from
our cowardly crew was quite out of the
question
for there was not a man amongst them
brave enough to use the stones which had
been brought on deck and which perhaps
might have been of some little use when
the Pirates came nearer the fair wind
and all the press of sail which we had
crowded on the junk-- approved of no use
for our pursuers who had much faster
sailing vessels were gaining rapidly
upon us again the nearest pirate fired
upon us I still remained quiet as I had
determined not to fire a single shot
until I was quite certain my gun would
take effect the third broadside which
followed this came whizzing over our
heads and through the sails without
however wounding either the men at the
helm
or myself the Pirates now seemed quite
sure of their prize and came down upon
us hooting and yelling like demons
at the same time loading their guns and
evidently determined not to spare their
shot this was a moment of intense
interest the plan which I had formed
from the first was now about to be put
to the proof and if the Pirates were not
the cowards which I believed them to be
nothing could save us from falling into
their hands their fearful yell seemed to
be ringing in my ears even now after
this lapse of time and when I am on the
other side of the globe the nearest
chunk was now within 30 yards of ours
their guns were now loaded and I knew
that the next discharge would completely
rake our decks now said I to our
helmsman keep your eyes fixed on me and
the moment you see me fall flat on the
deck you must do the same or you will be
shot I knew that the pirate who was now
on our Stern could not bring his guns to
bear upon us without putting his helm
down and bringing his gangway at right
angles with our Stern as his guns were
fired from the gangway I therefore kept
a sharp eye upon his helmsman and the
moment I saw him putting the helm down I
ordered our stairs men to fall flat on
their faces behind some wood and at the
same moment did so myself
we had scarcely done so when bang bang
went there
guns and the shot came whizzing close
over us splintering the wood about us in
all directions fortunately none of us
were struck
now Mandarin now they are quite close
enough cried out my companions who did
not wish to have another broadside like
the last I being of the same opinion
raised myself above the high stern of
our junk
and while the Pirates were not more than
20 yards from us hooting and yelling I
raped their decks fore and aft was shot
and ball from my double-barreled gun had
a thunderbolt fallen amongst them they
could not have been more surprised
doubtless many were wounded probably
some killed and all events the whole of
the crew not fewer than 40 or 50 men who
a moment before crowded the deck
disappeared in a marvellous manner
sheltering themselves behind the
bulwarks or lying flat on their faces
they were so completely taken by
surprise that their junk was left
without a helmsman her sails flapping in
the wind and as we were still carrying
all sail and keeping on our right course
they were soon left a considerable way
astern another was now bearing down upon
us as boldly as his companion had done
and commenced firing in the same manner
having been so successful with the first
I determined to follow the same plan
with this one and to pay no attention to
his firing until he should come to close
quarters the plot now began to thicken
for the first chunk had gathered way
again was following in our wake although
keeping at a respectful distance and
three others although still further
distant were making for the scene of
action as fast as they could in the
meantime the second was almost alongside
and continued giving us a broadside now
and then with their guns watching their
helm as before we sheltered ourselves as
well as we could at the same time my
poor fellows who were staring kept
begging and praying that I would fire
into our pursuers as soon as possible or
we should all be killed as soon as they
came within twenty or thirty yards of us
and I gave them the contents of both
barrels raking their decks as before
this time the helmsman fell and
doubtless several others were wounded in
a minute or two I could see nothing but
boards and shields which were held up by
the Pirates to protect themselves from
my firing their junk went out
then to the wind for want of a helmsman
and was soon left some distance behind
us while I was watching this vessel our
men called out to me that there was
another close on our liebe which I had
not observed on account of our mainsail
luckily however it proved to be an ink
ball wood junk like ourselves which the
Pirates had taken a short time before
but which although man by these Rascals
could do us no harm having no guns
the porn ink ball crew whom I could
plainly see on board seemed to be very
much downhearted and frightened I was
afterwards informed that when a junk is
captured all the principal people such
as the captain pilots and passengers are
taken out of her and a number of the
Pirates go on board and take her into
some of their dens amongst the islands
and keep her there until a heavy ransom
is paid both for the junk and the people
sometimes when a ransom cannot be
obtained the masts and spars and
everything else which is of any value
are taken out of her and she is set on
fire to other piratical junks which have
been following in our wake for some time
when they saw what had happened would
not venture any nearer and at last much
to my satisfaction the whole set of them
bore away now was the time for my
heroical companions to come from their
hiding place which they did with great
alacrity hooting and yelling as the
Pirates had done before and in derision
calling on them to come back and renew
the fight the stones too were now boldly
seized and thrown after the retreating
junks reaching to almost a tenth part of
the distance and a stranger who had not
seen these Gentry before would have
supposed them the bravest men in
existence fortunately the Pirates did
not think proper to accept the challenge
with the captain pilot crew and
passengers I was now one of the greatest
and best men in existence they actually
came and knelt before me as to some
superior being and expressed their deep
and lasting gratitude which however did
not last long the Sun was now setting
and all his glory behind the hills of
fuu-chin and many of the more devout
amongst the passengers and crew did not
fail to bow low and adoration and
thankfulness to this supposed deity for
their escape out of the hands of the
pirate
shortly after nightfall we arrived at
one of the safe Anchorage is where the
mandarins are too strong for the lawless
bands which infest the other parts the
coast on the following morning we again
got underway and proceeded the whole day
without molestation in the evening we
arrived in another safe Anchorage our
place of rendezvous but the security at
this place consisted in the number and
strength of the junks actually at anchor
there and not in the fair which the
Pirates entertained for the government
when we reached this place the night was
fine and as it was nearly full moon it
was almost as light as day the tide too
was just turning in our favor and as I
was most anxious to proceed on our
voyage I did everything in my power to
induce them to go on it was of no use
however for as soon as we reached the
Anchorage and found a large fleet of
junks the anchor was dropped and they
determined to stay there all night I
felt very much annoyed but saw it was no
use to grumble and went quietly to bed
in less than an hour from this time and
before I had fallen asleep hearing a
stirrup on deck I inquired what was the
cause and found that we were getting
underway this was agreeable news but as
I could not imagine what it caused them
to change their mind so soon I went up
on deck to see what was going on our
people that appeared had gone to sleep
the moment our anchor was down shortly
after this the other junks which it
turned out were only waiting for the
rise of the tide to enter some River in
the vicinity had all weighed anchor and
gone off all on board were now in great
consternation lest the Pirates should
come down upon us whilst at anchor and
no time was lost in getting it up and
proceeding on our voyage much of course
to my satisfaction on the following day
late in the afternoon when I was laid up
in my bed with fever the captain came
hurriedly down and informed me that
another fleet of Pirates were in sight
and evidently lying and wait for us I
was obliged to get up ill as I was and
when I got on deck I could see by the
aid of my telescope six junks coming out
from amongst the islands under the
mainland and evidently bearing down
towards us this time it was not so
skeptical as the last after having once
seen these rascally vessels
there was no mistaking others of the
same class as they came sneaking out of
the bays their clipper built hauls the
cut of their sails their ranking masts
and the crowd of fellows who line their
decks all told the business they were
after it was therefore evident that we
must prepare for another encounter it
now struck me that perhaps I might be
able to deceive the Pirates with regard
to our strength as I was afraid that I
might not again be so successful with
them particularly if they found out that
there was only one foreigner on board
knowing that they have a great dread of
foreigners and their guns my object was
to make them believe that there were a
number of us and that we were well armed
for this purpose I got up all the spare
clothes I had and put them on the least
Chinese looking Chinamen on board at the
same time I desired them to collect all
the short levers which they use for
hoisting their sails and in which at a
distance would look not unlike firearms
particularly if the deception was
assisted by the report of a
double-barreled gun everything looked
promising
and I thought my recruits were likely to
be of some service to me but when the
nearest Pirates who had been coming fast
down upon us gave us a broadside it was
too much for my Chinamen who were
instantly panic-struck threw down their
arms and ran below and added to this I
had again to threaten the man at the
helm who seemed half inclined to follow
the example of the others so I now
prepared for the worst
the Pirates came on firing at intervals
as the others had done and I followed my
former plan of watching their movements
until they were near enough for my gun
to tell upon them with fearful precision
their shot was now flying about our ears
and riddling our sails and they came on
in their usual noisy manner perfectly
unconscious of what I had in store for
their reception for the last time the
helm of the nearest chunk was put down
when we instantly fell flat in our faces
and allowed the shot to pass over us as
soon as their last gun was fired and
before they had time to load again I
poured the contents of my gun amongst
them fore-and-aft raking the deck as I
had done before this took them
completely by surprise and we were still
under a heavy press of sail we pursued a
considerable way ahead of them
to others up the fleet came up and fired
some shots at us but the whole of them
evidently imagined that a number of
foreigners are on board of our junk a
belief which doubtless had a great deal
to do with the success which attended my
efforts at length darkness coming on
they gave up the pursuit and bore away
from us and in two hours more we arrived
at a safe Anchorage the fever which I
had scarcely felt during all this
excitement now returned with greater
violence and I was heartily glad to go
below and turn into my bed during the
night I heard a great noise on board but
was too feverish and weak to make any
enquiries as to the cause in the morning
my servant informed me that it was
occasioned by the arrival of three junks
during the night which had been chased
to the entrance of the harbor by the
Pirates their head he said originally
been foreign company but one of them had
been taken the soldiers on board these
junks had not been so fortunate as we
had been for several of them were
severely wounded and I was now asked to
extract the balls
the wounds were large and ragged owing
to the iron shot which the Chinese use
in their guns advised the wounded men to
hurry on to Joe Shan where they would
get good medical advice up to nine
o'clock in the morning although the wind
and tide were both favourable there were
no signs of the junks getting underway I
therefore sent for the captain and
inquired if it was not his intention to
proceed he told me that he had had a
meeting with captains of the other
vessels and that they had determined to
get a convoy of war junks from the
Mandarin before they went on being now
with an eighty or ninety miles of Joe
Shan I could easily hire a small boat
for that distance and therefore said to
the captain
very well then I shall leave you here as
I am very unwell and anxious to get to
Joe Shawn as soon as possible go said I
turning to my servant and engage a boat
to take me to Joe Shan and bring it here
as soon as you can when he was about to
leave the vessel several of the crew
gathered round him and attempted to
persuade him not to go anxious to serve
his countrymen although at my expense he
lorded about for a little while and then
came back and informed me that it was no
use going on shore as I should not be
able to engage a boat to take me so far
as I had been informed by one of the
shore people who had come
bored that plenty of boats were to be
had on hire i felt annoyed at his deceit
and threatened to punish him if he did
not start immediately and bring a boat
off when he saw that i was determined he
turned sulkily away jumped into a sound
palm and procured a boat without the
slightest difficulty the captain and
crew now crowded round me begging me not
to leave them and offering to get up
there anchor and proceed at once
although my destination was Joe Shan I
had taken my passage for Ning ball as
all the wood junks were bound either for
that port or job who and their begging
me to stay I told them that unless they
would sail into Joe Shan Harbor and
leave me there as they passed
I would proceed in the small boat as it
was anxious to get there as soon as
possible in order to obtain medicine and
advice Oh said they if you will only go
with us we will run into Joe Shan Harper
and leave you there before we cross over
to Ning Bal upon this assurance I agreed
to accompany them the captains of the
other junks now came to me and asked me
if I would undertake to protect them all
from the attacks of the pirates as if so
they would get underway and go with us
also upon my telling them that I could
not undertake to do this they told me
they must wait until some arrangement
could be made with the mandarins as they
were afraid to proceed alone we
therefore left them at anchor and
proceeded on our voyage during the day
we frequently saw suspicious-looking
craft which were pronounced by the crew
to be chandos but none of them were near
enough to attack us late in the
afternoon as we approached Kato point a
promontory of the mainland near Joe Shan
we met a large fleet of merchant junks
sailing together for mutual protection
on their way down some of them came
alongside us and made anxious enquiries
regarding the Chandos and how many of
them they might expect to meet with our
people to not fail to give them an
exaggerated account of the number we had
seen and fought with and the news did
not appear greatly to delight them
during the night the tide against us and
as the wind although fair was light we
were obliged to anchor until morning
when I went on deck at daylight the
following morning I found we were just
under kitto point and only a few miles
from Joe Shan harbor the land was well
known to me
having been frequently there before it
was the most welcomed sight which had
met my eyes for many a long day and I
was thankful indeed to the Almighty for
my escape from the Pirates whilst the
man were heaving up the anchor my old
friends the captain and pilot came below
bolder and in much better spirits than
heretofore and informed me with the
greatest coolness that they had changed
their minds but going into the harbor of
Joe Shan that I must go over with them
to Ning ball from whence I could easily
return in a small boat for Joe Shan and
I felt very much nettled at this conduct
which considering that I had saved their
junk for being taken by the Pirates on
two separate occasions was most
ungrateful I've approached them with
this ingratitude telling them that as
they were now safe from the chandos they
imagined they can do with me just as
they pleased but you never deceived
yourselves more and I you may show as
much ingratitude as you please but I
shall take care that you fulfil the
promise you made to me yesterday and
take me into the harbor of Joe Shan
before you go over to Ning ball look
here you see this gun and these pistols
they are all loaded
you know what effects they produced upon
the Jan dough's take care they are not
turned against yourselves Englishmen
never allow promises which have been
made to them to be broken with impunity
I know the way into Joe Shan harbor as
well as you do and when the anchor is up
I shall stand at the helm and if the
pilot attempts to steer for Ning paw he
must take the consequence this threat
had the desired effect and the trembling
varlets landed me safely at Joe Shan in
the course of the forenoon what with the
fever and the excitement of the last few
days I was in a most deplorable
condition when I reached Joe Shan but as
the greater part of my collections were
in the country near Shanghai I was most
anxious to ascertain in what state they
were and finding an English vessel about
to sail for the Yang's aegean I
immediately crawled on board and having
a fair wind we soon reached our
destination
I was kindly received from my friend mr.
Mackenzie and under the skillful
treatment of dr. Kirk the fever
gradually left me amongst the more
important of the acquisitions which I
made in the vicinity of Shanghai I must
not forget to mention a fine and large
variety of peach which comes into the
markets there about the
of August and remains and perfection for
about 10 days it has grown in the peach
Archer it's a few miles to the south of
the city and is quite unusual thing to
see peaches of this variety 11 inches in
circumference and 12 ounces in weight
this is probably what some writers call
the Peking peach about which such
exaggerated stories have been told trees
of the Shanghai variety are now in the
garden of the horticultural society of
london the whole of my plants from the
districts of foo jo Jo shine and Ningbo
being brought together at Shanghai I got
them packed and on the 10th of October
left the north of China for Hong Kong
and England as I went down the river I
could not but look around me with pride
and satisfaction for in this part of the
country I had found the finest plants in
my collections it is only the patient
botanical collector the object of who's
on intermitted labour is the
introduction of the more valuable trees
and shrubs of other countries into his
own who can appreciate what I then felt
when we arrived at hong kong i divided
my collections and dispatched eight
glazed cases of living plants for
england the duplicates of these and many
others i reserved to take home under my
own care and then went up to canton and
took my passage for london and the ship
john cooper 18 glazed cases filled with
the most beautiful plants of northern
china were placed upon the poop of the
ship and we sailed on the 22nd of
december after a long but favourable
voyage we anchored in the thames on the
6th of May 1846 the plants arrived in
excellent order and were immediately
conveyed to the garden of the
Horticultural Society at Chyzyk already
many of those which I first imported
have found their way to the principal
gardens in Europe and at the present
time
October 20th 1846 the anemone japonica
is in full bloom in the garden of the
society at Chyzyk as luxurious and
beautiful as it ever grew on the graves
of the Chinese near the ramparts of
Shanghai so that ends mr. Robert
fortunes first book wanderings through
the northern provinces of China
you know I couldn't for the life of me
figure out the Chinese characters for
john doe's these these pirates
I mentioned that fortunes romanization
of Chinese words had me putting on my
detective hat and searching out the
meaning of what he was writing
well that one had me stumped so I just
read it like fortune wrote it that was
nice so for our second selection of this
episode I thought we'd go straight into
fortunes next book a journey to the tea
countries of China including song Lo and
the Bo Haiti hills it was published in
1852 and covers his exciting adventure
made in between june of 1848 and
february 1851 after he returned home
from his first trip he stayed put for
two years he wrote that book which as I
said was a big hit in its day and before
long representatives from the East India
Company approached him and gave him an
offer he couldn't refuse the top brass
at the Honourable company had read that
book too and when they put their heads
together they decided this was their man
on the first trip for the Horticultural
Society of London Robert fortune was in
his early 30s now in this second trip he
was in his mid to late 30s over the next
several episodes we'll read excerpts
from this book and then you can judge
for yourself how you feel about the
whole thing Sarah rose in her 2011 book
for all the tea in China
how England stole the world's favorite
drink and changed history maintain that
corporate espionage was committed anyway
I hope you like this story I won't read
the whole book just parts of it this is
how it begins on the 14th of August 1848
the Peninsular and oriental company's
steamship Braganza in which I was a
passenger dropped her anchor in the bay
of Hong Kong at nine o'clock in the
evening
in a few seconds our decks were crowded
with the inhabitants of the place all
anxious to meet their friends or to hear
the news from home as I did not intend
to go on shore until the following
morning I had sufficiently j''r to
survey the busy and exciting scene
on me among the numerous boats which
came off to us they were - which
presented a most striking appearance
they were very long and narrow and were
each propelled by about fifty oars they
had been built by the English and
American merchants to convey the news to
Canton on the arrival of the mail the
moment these boats received their
dispatches they started on their journey
and as they belonged to opposition
parties each did its best to outstrip
the other and it was off in a matter of
considerable importance to get the
earliest news a large sum of money was
distributed amongst the crew of the
winning boats the boat men made a great
noise Chinamen like all were talking all
we're giving orders for each had a stake
in the winning of the race at last the
papers letters of whatever they had to
take were put on board and off they
started across the bay for the mouth of
the Canton or Pearl River they plowed
the water like two enormous centipedes
and although they were going very fast
they were visible for some time in the
clear moonlight I watched them go from
the deck of the steamer until they were
lost in the distance but even then and
for some time afterwards I could hear
distinctly the quick splash of the oars
and the noise of the boisterous crews
steam has now invaded the quiet waters
of the Pearl River and these boats are
numbered amongst the things that were
the noise and excitement connected with
the arrival of the mail gradually
subsided those of our visitors who had
been lucky enough to get hold of a
Straits Times home news or Times
returned on shore to peruse it while
others hastened home to communicate to
their friends the news they had been
able to pick up from the officers or
passengers of the ship by 11 o'clock at
night all was perfectly quiet
captain Potts and myself had our chairs
taken up on deck and we sat down to
breathe the cool air and enjoy the scene
by which we were surrounded it was a
clair moonlight night such a night as
one sees only in the sunny lands of the
east those who have anchored at the bay
of hong kong by moonlight will agree
with me that the scene at such a time is
one of the grandest and most beautiful
which can be imagined and this evening
the landlocked bay was smooth as glass
scarcely a breath of air
and the water and as the clear moonbeams
played upon its surface it seemed
covered with glittering gems numerous
vessels from all parts of the world lake
dotted around us they're dark hulls and
tall masts looming large in the distance
the view was bounded on all sides by
rugged and barren hills and it required
no great stretch of fancy to imagine
oneself on a Highland lake the white
town of Victoria was distinctly visible
from where we lay and very pretty it
appeared in the moonlight it is built
along the southern shores of the bay and
in some places extends a considerable
way up the side of the hill the
background of the picture consists of a
chain of rugged mountains which are
nearly 2,000 feet above the level of the
sea altogether the view was a charming
one when they went on shore the
following morning I found a great change
had taken place since 1845 many parts of
the town then bear were now densely
covered with houses our merchant princes
had built themselves houses not inferior
to those in the far-famed city of
palaces and the barracks for the troops
were equally handsome and expensive
although unfortunately not equally
healthy and last of all a pretty English
church was rising slowly on the hillside
an interest in gardening and planting
had sprung up which promises to lead to
most satisfactory results when I was
formerly in Hongkong everyone complained
of the barren appearance of the island
and if the intense heat and glare of the
Sun officers in the army and others who
had been many years the hotter parts of
India all agreed that there was a
fierceness and oppressiveness and the
sun's rays hair which they had never
experienced in any other part of the
world from 1843 to 1845 the mortality
was very great whole regiments were
nearly swept away and many of the
government officers and merchants shared
the same fate various opinions were
expressed regarding the cause which
produced these great disasters some said
one thing and some another although all
seem to think that imperfect drainage
has something to do with it and a hue
and cry was set up to have the island
properly drained the island is a chain
of mountains there's very little flat
ground and
whereupon it and hence the water which
flows from the sides of the hills gushes
rapidly down towards the sea imperfect
drainage therefore could have very
little to do with its unhealthiness I've
always thought that although various
causes may operate to render Hong Kong
unhealthy yet one of the principal
reasons is the absence of trees and of
the shade which they afford in a
communication which I have the honour to
make to the government here in 1844 I
pointed out this circumstance and
strongly recommended them to preserve
the wood then growing upon the island
from the Chinese who were in the habit
of cutting it down annually and at the
same time to plant extensively
particularly on the sides of the roads
and on the lower hills I'm happy to say
that these recommendations have been
carried out to a certain extent although
not so fully as I had wished it is well
known that a healthy vegetation such as
shrubs and trees decomposes the carbonic
acid of the atmosphere and renders it
fit for respiration besides which there
is a softness and coolness about trees
particularly in a hot climate that is
always agreeable having nothing to
detain me in Hong Kong I took the
earliest opportunity of going northwards
to Shanghai this town is the most
northerly of the five ports at which
foreigners are permitted to trade and is
situated nearly 1,000 miles northeast
from Hong Kong in 1844 I published an
account of it in the atheneum and in
1846 I described it more fully in my
wanderings in both these works I
ventured to point it out as a place
likely to become of great importance
both to England and America as a port of
trade easy of access from the sea taking
it to consideration its proximity to the
large towns of Hangzhou Suzhou in the
ancient capital of Nanjing the large
native trade the convenience of inland
transit by means of rivers and canals
the fact that teas can be brought here
more readily than to Canton and lastly
viewing this place as an immense Mart
for our cotton manufacturers there could
be no doubt that in a few years it will
not only rival Canton but become a place
of far greater importance when these
remarks were written the war had just
been brought to a satisfactory
termination and the Treaty of Nanjing
had been wrung from the Chinese the
first merchant ship had entered the
river one or two English merchants
had arrived and we were living in
wretched Chinese houses eating with
chopsticks half starved with cold and
sometimes drenched in bed with rain when
the weather happened to be frosty we not
unfrequently found the floors of our
rooms in the morning covered with snow a
great change has taken place since those
days I now found myself September 1848
after having been in England for nearly
six years once more in a china boat
sailing up the Shanghai River towards
the city
the first object which met my view as I
approached the town was a forest of
masts not of junks only which had been
so striking on former occasions but of
could Li foreign ships chiefly from
England in the United States of America
they were now 26 large vessels at anchor
here many of which had come loaded with
the produce of our manufacturing
districts and were returning filled with
silks and teas but I was much more
surprised with the appearance which the
shore presented that with the shipping I
had heard that many English and American
houses had been built indeed one or two
were being built before I left China but
a new town of very considerable size now
occupied the place of wretched Chinese
hovels cotton fields and tombs the
Chinese were moving gradually backwards
into the country with their families
effects and all that pertained unto them
reminding one of the Aborigines of the
West with this important difference that
the Chinese generally left of their free
will and were liberally remunerated for
their property by the foreigners their
chief care was to remove with their
other effects the bodies of their
deceased friends which are commonly
interred on private property near their
houses hence it was no uncommon thing to
meet several coffins being borne by
coolies our friends to the westward in
many instances when the coffins were
uncovered they were found totally
decayed and it was impossible to remove
them when this was the case a Chinese
might be seen holding a book in his hand
which contained a list of the bones and
directing others in their search after
these the last remnants of mortality it
is most amusing to see the groups of
Chinese merchants who come from some
distance inland on a visit to Shanghai
they wander about along the Riverside
with wonder depicted in their
countenances the square
vessels which crowd the river the houses
of the foreigners their horses and their
dogs are all objects of wonder even more
so than the foreigners themselves mr.
Beale who has one of the finest houses
here has frequent applications from the
respectable Chinese who are anxious to
see the inside of an English dwelling
these applications are always complied
with in the kindest manner and the
visitors depart highly delighted with
the view it is to be hoped that these
peeps at our comforts and refinements
may have a tendency to raise the
barbarian race a step or two higher in
the eyes of the enlightened Chinese my
object in coming thus far north was to
obtain seeds and plants of the tea shrub
for the Honorable East India Company's
plantations in the Northwest provinces
of India it was a matter of great
importance to procure them from those
districts in China where the best teas
were produced and I now set about
accomplishing this object there were
various tea districts near Ning ball
where very fair green teas were prepared
for Chinese use but these teas were not
very well suited to the foreign market
it might be that the plant was precisely
the same variety from which the finer
sorts were made and that the difference
consisted only in climate and soil or
more likely still in a different mode of
manipulation this might or might not be
the case no one so far as I knew had
ever visited the cuejoe district and
brought away plants from the tea hills
there in these circumstances I
considered that it would be a most
unsatisfactory proceeding to procure
plants and seeds from the Ning ba
district only or to take it for granted
that they were the same as those in the
great green tea country of cuejoe it was
a very easy matter to get plants and
seeds from the tea countries near an ink
ball foreigners are allowed to visit the
islands and the Jo Shan archipelago such
as jo Shan and ching tong and both of
which the tea shrub is most abundant
they can also go to the celebrated
temple of tian tong about 20 miles
inland in the neighborhood of which tea
is cultivated upon an extensive scale at
the hydro district is upwards of 200
miles inland from either of the northern
ports of Shanghai or Ningbo it is a
sealed country to Europeans if we accept
the Jesuit missionaries no one has ever
entered within the sacred precincts of
cuejoe
since this was written I have been
informed that the Reverend mr. Medhurst
passed through some part of this
district having determined if possible
to procure plants and seeds from the
celebrated country they were but two
ways of proceeding in the business
either Chinese agents must be employed
to go into the country to procure them
and bring them down or I must go there
myself at first sight the former way
seemed the only one possible certainly
it was the easiest but there were some
very formidable objections to this
course suppose I engaged Chinese agents
for this purpose and plenty would have
undertaken the mission how could a be at
all certain that the plants or seeds
which they would have brought me had
been obtained in the districts in
question no dependence can be placed
upon the veracity of the Chinese I may
see my charitable but such is really the
case and if it's suited the purpose of
the agents employed in this matter they
would have gone a few miles inland to
the nearest tea district one which I
could have visited myself with ease and
safety and have made up their collection
there after staying away for a month or
two that would have returned to me with
the collection and if requisite have
sworn that they had obtained it in the
country to which I had desired them to
proceed it was just possible that they
might have done otherwise but even if
they had I could not have been certain
that such was the case and I therefore
abandon all idea of managing the
business in that way and determined to
make an effort to penetrate into the pho
country myself where I could not only
procure the true plants which produce
the finest green teas of Commerce but
also gain some information with regard
to the nature of the soil of the
district and the best modes of
cultivation
a a to Kwai Cho men in my service at
this time I sent for them and inquired
whether it was possible to penetrate so
far into the country they replied that
we could easily do so and that they were
quite willing to accompany me only
stipulating that I should discard my
English costume and adopt the dress of
the country I knew that this was
indispensable if I wish to accomplish
the object in view and readily acceded
to the terms my servants now procured me
a Chinese dress and had the tale which I
had worn in former years nicely dressed
by the barber everything was soon and
readiness except the boat which had to
be engaged for the first stage of our
journey this was just then a
matter owing to some boatman having been
severely punished by the Chinese
authorities for taking three or four
foreigners some distance inland to see
the Silk districts these gentlemen went
in the English dress and complaints were
consequently made by the officers and
districts through which they had passed
to the mandarins and Shanghai and this
account it was impossible to engage boat
as a foreigner and I desired my servant
to hire it in his own name and merely
state that two other persons were to
accompany him he agreed to this plan and
soon returned with a chop or agreement
which he had entered into with a man who
engaged to take us as far as the city of
Hangzhou thus far all was right but now
my two men began to be jealous of each
other each wanting to manage the concern
with the view as it proved ultimately of
getting as many dollars out of me as
possible one of them had been engaged as
a servant and linguist and the other was
a little better than the common
are therefore entrusted the management
of our affairs to the former much to the
disgust of the other who was an older
man in an ordinary case I would have
sent one of them away but as I had but
little confidence in either I thought
that in their present jealous state the
one would prove a check upon the other
the projected journey was a long one the
way was unknown to me and I should have
been placed in an awkward position had
they agreed to rob me and then run off
and leave me when far inland the jealous
feeling that existed between them was
therefore I considered rather a
safeguard than otherwise as I was
anxious to keep the matter as secret as
possible I intended to have left the
English part of the town at night in its
share and gone on board the boat near to
the east gate of the city where she laid
moored in the river greatly to my
surprise however I observed a boat such
as I knew mine to be alongside one of
the English jetties and apparently ready
for my reception is that the boat you
have engaged said I to my servant Wang
yes said he that is gone and told
the boatman all about the matter and
that an Englishman is going in his boat
but will the boat men consent to go now
oh yes he replied if you only had a
trifle more to the fair to this I
consented and after a great many delays
everything was at last pronounced to be
ready for our starting as the boatman
knew who I was I went on board and my
English dress and kept it on during the
first day when I rose in the morning of
the second day
we were some distance from Shanghai and
the boatman suggested that it was now
time to discard the English dress and
adopt that of the country according to
our agreement to put on the dress was an
easy matter but I also had to get my
head shaved in operation which required
a barber Wang who was the most active of
my two men was laid up that morning with
fever and ague so that the duty devolved
upon the the latter was a large
boned clumsy fellow whose only
recommendation to me was as being a
native of that part of the country to
which I was bound having procured a pair
of scissors he clipped the hair from the
front back and sides of my head leaving
only a patch upon the crown he then
washed those parts with hot water after
the manner of the Chinese and having
done so he took up a small razor and
began to shave my head I suppose I must
have been the first person upon whom he
had ever operated and I am charitable
enough to wish most sincerely that I may
be the last he did not shave he actually
scraped my poor head until the tears
came running down my cheeks and I cried
out in pain all he said was hi-yah very
bad very bad and continued the operation
to make matters worse and a try my
temper more the boat men were peeping
into the cabin and evidently enjoying
the whole affair and thinking at capital
sport I really believed I should have
made a scene of a less amusing kind had
I not been restrained by my Prudential
motives and by the consideration that
the poor was really doing the
best he could the shaving was finished
at last I then dressed myself in the
costume of the country and the result
was pronounced by my servants and
boatman to be very satisfactory the
whole country to the westward of
Shanghai is intersected with rivers and
canals so that the traveler can visit by
boat almost all the towns and cities in
this part of the province some of the
canals lead to the large cities of
song-chun su Jo Nanjing and onward by
the Grand Canal to the capital itself
others again running to the west and
southwest formed the highways to the
Tartar city of Jabu hangzhou and to
numerous other cities and towns which
are studded over this large and
important plane we proceeded in a
southwesterly direction my destination
being the city of Hangzhou having a fair
wind during the first day
we got as far as the mall Lake a
distance of 120 or 130 Li from Shanghai
here we stopped for the night making our
boat fast to a post driven into the
grassy banks of the lake
starting early next morning we reached
in the forenoon a town of considerable
size named joshing yen and a little
farther on we came to the city of Jiang
a large place walled and fortified this
city seems nearly as large as Shanghai
and probably contains about the same
number of inhabitants two hundred and
seventy thousand its walls and ramparts
have been in a most dilapidated and
ruinous condition but the people got
such a fright when the English took job
poo which is not a very great distance
off that they came forward with funds
and had the defences of their cities
substantially repaired such was the
boatman's story when accounting for the
excellent order in which the
fortifications were a number of old
grain junks of great size considering
the depth of water are moored in the
canal abreast of the city and are
apparently used as dwelling houses by
the natives some however are half sunk
in the water and appear entirely
abandoned chunks of the same description
as these are seen abreast of all the
large towns in the Grand Canal when too
old for the government service they seem
to be drawn up to the nearest city and
either used by government officers as
dwelling houses or sold to the highest
bidder
okay that was that you're all set up now
for Robert fortunes second adventure in
China he's at his imperialist snooty
best next time when we meet we'll pick
up where we left off and continue this
journey if you're someone interested in
tea you'll for sure appreciate these
next few episodes if I'm lucky
perhaps Liu and NYC will tweet about it
so until we meet again
me am Ichi this is Laszlo Montgomery or
the China vintage hour be sure to listen
to the China history podcast if you
haven't had a chance to check that one
out we're related all part of the tea
cup media empire contact me any time if
you have access to any antiquarian books
that are right for this program feel
free to recommend them to me take care
everyone see you next time
you